cd C:\NIDS
venv\Scripts\activate
Run capture:
tshark -i Wi-Fi -a duration:300 -w test_live.pcap

Run extractor:
python flow_extractor.py

Run prediction:
python predict_live.py


Live Network Traffic
tshark capture
flow extractor. py
live flows basic. csv
predict live. py
Attack detection
Repeat every 30 seconds


venv – A Python virtual environment folder that contains all project-specific dependencies such as TensorFlow, NumPy, Pandas, and Scikit-learn. It isolates the project libraries from the system Python installation to avoid version conflicts and maintain reproducibility.

flow_extractor.py – A Python script that reads captured network traffic from a .pcap file and converts raw packets into structured network flow features such as packet count, duration, protocol, and average packet length. These extracted features are used as input data for the intrusion detection model.

live_flows_basic.xlsx – A dataset file generated by the flow extractor containing numerical flow-level features derived from captured network packets. Each row represents a network flow and each column represents a statistical feature used by the machine learning model.

NIDS.txt – A documentation or instruction file containing notes about the Network Intrusion Detection System project, including commands used for packet capture, feature extraction, and model prediction.

nids_label_encoder.pkl – A serialized scikit-learn LabelEncoder object that converts textual class labels (e.g., “Normal”, “Attack”) into numerical values required by the machine learning model and decodes them back to readable labels after prediction.

nids_lstm_model.keras – A trained deep learning model saved in Keras format that uses an LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) neural network architecture to analyze network flow features and classify traffic as normal or potentially malicious.

nids_monitor.py – A Python monitoring script designed to automate the intrusion detection pipeline by continuously observing captured traffic data, running the feature extraction process, and triggering predictions for real-time threat detection.

nids_scaler.pkl – A serialized feature scaling object (such as StandardScaler or MinMaxScaler) used to normalize numerical input features before they are fed into the neural network, ensuring the model receives data in the same format used during training.

predict_live.py – A Python script that loads the trained model, scaler, and label encoder to perform predictions on newly extracted network flow features, determining whether the observed traffic represents normal behavior or a potential intrusion.

test_live.pcap – A packet capture file generated using tshark that stores raw network packets observed on the system’s network interface. This file acts as the primary input for the flow extraction process.

test_tf.py – A small test script used to verify that TensorFlow is correctly installed and functioning within the project environment by importing the library and performing a basic operation or version check.